Student Opinion: Video gaming can have
negative effects on kids' brains and bodies
By Margaret Buckler, student contributor, adapted by Newsela staff on 08.16.18
Word Count 743
Level 950L

Is playing video games bad for kids' brains? One student argues that they are. Image: Newsela staff

It's an invasion! Nope, not an alien invasion – a video game invasion. Many kids spend hours in
the virtual worlds of their computer and TV screens. 

Rather than studying for school or going outside, they are spending all their free time playing
video games. 

In fact, a 2011 study by research group NPD claimed that more than 9 out of 10 kids played video
games. That number has probably only gone up. 

It's not just kids either. According to Medical News Today, more than 150 million people in the
United States play video games for at least 3 hours per week. That is more than 1 out of 3 people in
the U.S.

Children have growing minds and bodies. The continuous need to play video games has several
negative, unhealthy effects on children. These effects can include slowing students' education,
promoting violence and affecting their physical health.

This article is available at 5 reading levels at https://newsela.com.

Fortnite, Roblox and Minecraft are popular online
multiplayer games. In the last 30 days, Fortnite was
one of the most searched topics on Google. It was
searched for more than U.S. history topics. Searches
for the game Roblox were higher than searches for
biology. Minecraft was searched more than an SAT
preparation resource. The SAT is a test high school
students take to help them get into colleges.

Education Takes A Backseat To Video Games

This increase in searches for video games shows that
they have become a higher priority than educational
subjects.

More students than ever are searching for and playing
video games. It is clear video game addiction is taking
place in schools. With newly convenient availability to computers and tablets, it's easy for students
to switch from educational sites to computer games. Personally, I see this very often. Video games
are all kids want to do these days, at school and at home.

Adults sometimes say that too much television or screen time can make your brain lose cells.
Believe it or not, this is actually true. Studies from the University of Montreal discovered that
playing "shooter" games can harm the hippocampus area of the brain, killing brain cells. Damage
to this part of the brain can also increase the chances of Alzheimer's disease, which causes severe
memory loss. It can also lead to mental illnesses like depression.

Everyone feels sad every once in a while. Being seriously depressed is different because it prevents
someone from being able to function.

Mental illness refers to a range of mental health conditions. These are disorders that can affect
mood, thoughts and behavior. Many people have mental health concerns at some point. Most
mental illnesses can be treated with medication and therapy.

Mindless Gaming Is Bad For The Brain

That said, all of these health concerns could make it harder for a person to get a decent education.

Not only are video games taking time out of education, but they can also promote violence.
Popular video games, such as Fortnite and Grand Theft Auto, include guns and vulgar language.
Younger children often play these games. According to many studies, violent video games can
increase aggressive behavior.

A study asked some participants to play violent games in their lab, while others played nonviolent
games. Then, they measured the behavior of each group in social experiments afterward. These
studies show that playing violent games results in instant changes to behavior. Many people know
aggressive behavior can be caused by many mental health issues, and even physical injuries.
However, people do not know that it can also be caused by video game addiction.

This article is available at 5 reading levels at https://newsela.com.

Constantly playing video games can also be negative for physical and mental health. It can worsen
personal hygiene and cause eye strain. Stressed eyes can lead to migraines, which are really
intense and painful headaches. Studies show that video game addiction is connected with
depression and substance abuse. These are problems kids should not be facing at such young ages.

It's unhealthy for children to stay indoors looking at a screen all day long. Instead of going outside
and playing sports, kids are sitting inside playing sports connected to a screen. 

With video gaming being so popular, it's difficult to realize all the negative effects it causes to the
brain and body. It's time we take a closer look at these negative effects before mindlessly gaming
all day.

Do you have an opinion to share on an issue affecting your school or community? Students may
submit their original opinion piece to editorial@newsela.com

This article is available at 5 reading levels at https://newsela.com.

